Have you ever been distressed?
Well, if you haven’t, you’re not human,
because all humans
suffer from some form of distress
in the short period of life
that we have this side of the new world.
But what is distress?
Some say it’s extreme anxiety.
Others say it’s sorrow.
Then there are a few who label it as pain.
Well, what is it that causes the distress?
Well, a number of things.
Here’s one that somewhat heads the list:
death of a spouse.
Second behind that
is injury or some type of illness.
Then there’s the loss of a job.
“How am I going to care
for my family, my wife, and my children?”
And then here’s a very important one:
not being able to share
in the Kingdom preaching work to the full.
So these are reasons
why we are distressed.
Now, of course,
these are not the only reasons.
There are many others.
But how would you fare?
How would you feel
if you were undergoing
some type of distress?
Well, could you be sad?
Is that how you’re going to feel?
Are you depressed?
Some say: “Well, yes.
That’s what hits me.”
Others say: “Well, low in spirits
—I just, I don’t know;
“I’m just down and out.
My get-up-and-go got up and left.”
Others say, “Well, I just feel
like going off and hiding and crying.”
Well, that pretty well sums it up.
But is it possible
to rejoice when distressed?
Well, we know it is
because we have examples in the Bible.
The Bible is filled with examples.
We’re just going to isolate one or two.
Paul was one who
rejoiced behind being distressed.
He was able to rejoice
despite the feelings that he had.
Now, if you have your Bible handy,
open it, please, to 2 Corinthians,
and read along with me
2 Corinthians 7:5.
You’ll notice that it says:
“In fact, when we arrived in Macedonia,
our bodies got no relief,
“but we continued
to be afflicted in every way
“—[now, note the following]
there were fights
on the outside, fears within”
—“fights on the outside, fears within.”
Yes, Paul was up against it,
and he knew it;
but yet he was able to rejoice.
But what was he up against?
Well, earlier, Paul had hoped
to meet up with Titus in Troas.
But he hadn’t heard from Titus,
and he didn’t get a message from him.
He wondered about him.
He wondered how he was feeling.
Was something hard-hitting
against him at this time
in that Corinthian congregation?
So Paul wanted to know.
So he worried about his friend,
and we would too
if we were waiting to hear from a friend
and we hadn’t received an answer.
He likely worried so much
that it caused him to feel
somewhat depressed.
He thought,
‘Well, how long will I have to wait
on my friend Titus?’
Well, he didn’t have to wait too long.
Titus finally joined him in Macedonia.
And what happened?
Well, Paul was comforted,
and upon hearing Titus’ favorable report
about the brothers and sisters in Corinth,
Paul “rejoiced even more,”
says 2 Corinthians chapter 7,
if you’ll just glance down
at verses 6 and 7.
So he was helped by his brother.
It’s the brotherhood that we
have to reach out to too.
And it will help us
—this beautiful brotherhood
that Jehovah has brought us into.
And we’ll find
that our brothers are there for us
regardless of what we
may be fighting against.
So we can rejoice.
We may experience distress
in the form of discouragement.
And usually all of us have had that
come into our life from time to time.
There are so many things that can
bring about discouragement.
Here’s something else:
anguish over a lost loved one
—maybe a marriage mate has died.
You’ve been together for many years,
and like Jehovah said in the garden of Eden:
“The two shall become one.”
And, you know, that’s really what happened
to you and your wife,
who you lost,
or your husband, who you lost.
So you are somewhat low in spirits.
You are blue.
You’re a little downhearted, gloomy,
heavyhearted and, yes, sad.
But, now, let’s recall
that we have three provisions
that can strengthen our ability to rejoice
despite the trials that we’re undergoing.
What are they?
Well, here’s the first one:
It’s our relationship with Jehovah.
David had a fine relationship with Jehovah.
And if you’ll turn to 1 Samuel chapter 30,
and just follow along
as you hear me say a few things
behind these two, three, or four verses.
We’re going to start with verse 1.
That’s 1 Samuel chapter 30.
When his own men wanted
to kill David because the Amalekites
burned the city down and had taken
their wives
and children captive
—even took two of David’s wives—
David was very distressed,
as you’ll see in that account.
But, now, notice near the end of it,
there in verse 6:
“But David strengthened himself
by Jehovah his God.”
Here’s where our strength comes from too.
It’s from turning to Jehovah our God,
and he’s there for us,
and he’s going to comfort us.
He is the God of comfort,
as was acknowledged
in his written Word, the Bible.
So that’s the first:
our relationship with Jehovah.
Now, here comes the second:
It’s our brotherhood.
My, how we are strengthened
by our brothers!
Remember the 133rd Psalm,
where it says
at the very beginning: “Look!
“How good and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
Now, we all know
that that is a true statement,
but we also know something else:
It’s a major scheme
of Satan the Devil
to isolate us from our brothers
if  he can put us in jail.
But if that happens and we are jailed,
we can still associate.
Now, how can we do that if we’re jailed
and they’re way off somewhere
and we’re behind bars?
Here it is: by memories.
For instance, get out your scrapbook
and photo album
that are locked in your brain
(not the literal
but that are locked in your brain)
and feed on the “spiritual scraps.”
What are they?
The memories.
Memories are foods
that strengthen and cause rejoicing.
Now, if any of you out there
are as old as I am,
then you know that old folks
do this all the time.
We’re just too tired to do anything else,
so we just live on memories.
And it brings joy to our heart.
Now, that’s the second thing:
our brotherhood.
Now, the third is our hope.
Our hope is to serve Jehovah
under righteous conditions
throughout eternity.
Eternity is forever.
It never ends.
It goes on and on and on.
For instance, look at the sky above;
you cannot see
a beginning or an ending.
That’s eternity: always there.
You’re going to be able to rejoice
for an eternity living forever.
Now, as you watch the following video,
take note of which provisions
helped our brother and sister to rejoice
—and that, despite distress.
We knew when we first got married
that we would enjoy having a family.
So when we first found out
that we were pregnant,
we were overjoyed.
When Becky first told me she was pregnant,
it’s like a light switch
went off in my heart.
Immediately, I felt like a dad.
Instantly, you begin to make plans.
It was like all this love
just flooded in.
One day, Becky was feeling a little off,
and a friend encouraged us,
“Just go see the doctor.”
So we did.
And while we were there,
they did an ultrasound.
The doctor came back
and they said
there wasn’t a heartbeat anymore.
That was a very difficult moment
—something I can never forget.
Because all of a sudden, all of those hopes,
those dreams,
those preparations you are making
—they’re gone.
This place in your heart
that opened up to make room for this child
is now this huge, gaping, open hole
and there’s nothing to fill it.
It just is incredible emptiness.
We didn’t know what to do.
But it was a meeting night,
so we wanted to go to the meeting.
It felt like the place
where Jehovah’s holy spirit is,
and we wanted to be there
because we knew
we were not going to be able
to survive this on our own strength.
We needed Jehovah.
After people learned
that we had lost
the baby, so many people
shared a little bit
of their experiences with me,
which made us feel not alone,
for sure.
But Jehovah has also given us
some incredible friends
—friends who have stuck closer to us
than a brother,
friends who always seem to know
when we’re having a hard day,
who have prayed with us,
who have taken walks with us, listened.
And I know those are expressions
Jehovah has given us.
Regaining joy
is a work in progress.
There was a particular scripture
in my personal study
that I found very helpful,
Psalm 139, where it talks
about how there’s nowhere
that Jehovah can’t find us.
There’s no darkness
that is too dark for Jehovah.
And it felt
like such a dark place.
Dwelling on that scripture
was something that helped me a lot.
And gradually, bit by bit,
I felt like Jehovah did help me
to see beautiful things again.
When we experience distress,
Jehovah helps us.
We’re not left in despair.
For instance, here
in 2 Corinthians chapter 4, it tells us,
if we also include the footnote—
Now, that’s the 8th verse
of 2 Corinthians chapter 4.
Now, this is how it reads:
“We are hard-pressed in every way,
but not cramped beyond movement;
we are perplexed,
but not absolutely with no way out.”
Now, the footnote says,
“not left in despair.”
Jehovah is not going
to leave us in despair.
Now, which provisions
from Jehovah are helping you to rejoice
despite any mental or emotional distress
that you may be experiencing even now?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
our hope, or is it something else?
In addition to the provisions from Jehovah,
consider these practical suggestions:
Maintain a healthy diet.
Coupled with that, get sufficient rest,
and get a measure of exercise.
Now, you can make two lists.
One, of the problems that you can solve,
and the other, of problems
you cannot solve at present.
Act on the first list,
and leave the rest in Jehovah’s hands.
Talk things out with an elder
or perhaps a mature friend,
someone you’re close to,
or a parent.
They are there to help us,
and they’re ready and willing
to share the knowledge
and the understanding that they have.
And they’ll do it generously with you.
Realize that some forms of mental distress
may require professional assistance.
This is what Jesus said at Luke 5:31:
“Those who are healthy
do not need a physician,
but those who are ill do.”
Now, of course, that decision is up to you,
but it’s there in the scripture.
It may be that you need
the help of a physician,
someone who is qualified
to look into certain matters.
Please rejoice in knowing
that you have Jehovah’s approval.
Don’t doubt it, not even for a moment.
Now, granted, it’s not easy
to deal with mental or emotional distress.
But keep in mind
that Jehovah understands,
and he will help you
to keep on enduring.
And your loyal endurance
brings Jehovah’s approval,
which is one of the greatest reasons
that we have for rejoicing.
Know that God has not left you.
You have his approval,
like a large shield surrounding you,
and his blessing.
So rejoice in that knowledge,
and keep on rejoicing
despite distress.
Brother Gerrit Lösch,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice
Despite . . . Persecution.”